---
title: Spring Rants
layout: blogpost
author: James Keats
selectedurl: Blog
tags: life
description: There are so many snippets of thoughts that I don't have the discipline or creativity to mold or sculpt into a coherent whole.
---

There are so many snippets of thoughts that I don't have the discipline or creativity to mold or sculpt into a coherent whole.

I hate the meme of the "former gifted child." Like many, many other trends of that variety, it robs me and plenty of others of the ability to mourn a certain loss of that power and potential or forces the mourning to be ironic. Feeling deeply the loss of what you could have been instead is relegated to 144 characters and a gif.

What if I were a girl? I used to not even entertain the thought, tell myself I simply "didn't feel gender very strongly" (which I think *is* valid for some people, and maybe even valid for my past self). That's different from being agender, which is a very strong feeling towards not having a gender, or at least not fitting anywhere within the binary. That's a valid feeling too, but not what I'm talking about. I never felt strongly about it in any way; I told myself I couldn't be misgendered because I simply didn't care. That feels wrong now. All the "warning signs" stack up against me now. Even my previous defense buffer of it being just a physical envy thing is failing now. But now I feel the beginnings of resentment at just being perceived as a man. I chafe against the expectations and preconceptions of masculinity. I have seen dysphoria live in real time in front of me and I don't think I feel anything like that pain and horror, but I still mostly hate seeing myself in the mirror. Candy says, "I have come to hate my body." Of course, there's an active culture war being waged against trans folks right now. It's one that they'll almost certainly win in time, but there's going to be a lot of hatred and pain first. I've survived so far as a guy. If I even wanted to change that, I doubt I'd ever be able to pass and it sure is hard to want to give up safety and privilege.

Somehow I've found myself largely isolated from queerdom which gives me a special kind of pain. I was never super tightly knit with any group that was mainly held together by that, but I've always had more queer friends around me than I do now. I've never been ashamed of my sexuality but I never felt particularly proud of it either; maybe it's the privilege of growing up in an accepting family in an accepting environment, but it just feels like a relatively small facet of who I am. I never went through any sort of struggle for it, I had "accepted" (more like acknowledged) it by late middle school. So I always viewed with some suspicion those who made their queerness a huge part of who they were, as if they were taking something mundane and trying to craft an entire interesting personality from it. The couple of times I tried to enter into those groups, I remember not feeling particularly welcome. Maybe I was the boring one.

While sexual *orientation* is now largely a thing to be celebrated, actual sexuality is still a thing to be ashamed of. The Puritan roots still show, although I'm not sure it's *just* that. In left-leaning spaces, male sexuality in particular is something to be ashamed of and to hide. Thirst posts by women are funny, ironic, powerful, a reclamation. By men, disgusting and regressive. Inherently predatory. It's taken as a sign that you're not actually woke after all, that you're just one of the dude bros who sees women as sexual objects and nothing more, etc. I can already imagine a type of "oh, boohoo" responses to this; that it's just in my head, that male sexuality is absolutely normalized by society, that for a woman the choices are being called a whore or prude and there is no winning. I don't disagree with any of that (except maybe that this is all in my head). For everyone, it's largely something to be kept hidden, not to be openly discussed.  **All** of us are trapped in the box laid out by conservative online platforms, where Puritanesque policies put in place to "protect the children" (who shouldn't fucking be on social media anyway) stifle positive sexual liberation and expression. It has led to a generation of self-policing, a reemergence of fear or disgust at our own desires, a whole class of horny jail memes which is just thinly veiled "content policy" enforcement. Free the nipple, because firstly female bodies should not be inherently sexualized, but secondly even when it *is* a form of sexualized self-expression, it should be allowed.

I am consistently in awe of all the musical artists I admire. How do they find the words that they do. I simultaneously feel like I have so much I need to express, and yet at the same time I am Dylan Moran's "just like everybody else, except somehow more boring." When Emperor X screams about digging through the rubble or the National Guard patrolling through downtown, I feel it in the pit of my stomach. When Will Sheff sings about a coal-black virgin spinning above an open ocean, I know exactly where he's coming from. When Lindsey Jordan quotes the Velvet Underground, it rends me in twain. How have they figured out these words that half the time have no relation to the feeling they evoke. Where did they discover the magic? Why am I trapped writing boring code for an unexciting project when I could be doing anything else? Oops, back to the "former gifted child" trap again.

Maybe the secret for getting out of your head is in helping others. Too bad they all speak French here.

It's been well over a decade at this point since I tried to write any sort of long form fiction. It certainly wasn't very good when I did (I mean, I was in middle/high school) but at least I had the ambition and creative will to try it. Now I find myself rolling my eyes at not only my own ideas but most others too. Everything I read, I feel like I've read it before. China Mieville's books were a fresh respite from that feeling because they were just so bizarre, especially The City & The City, but very little else is. I end up reading mostly non-fiction as a result. When we go to a bookstore and I head to the fiction section, I'll grab a few random books that have interesting titles or covers and read the first sentence. Time and time again I am left pained by them. Nobody has mastered the "hook of the first sentence." They're always either cliche or dull, minus an exceptional few who manage to be both. The first sentence of "The Last Days of New Paris" is simply: "A street in lamp light." Whenever I'm at the book store, it's always some trash that tries to "pull you straight into the action" or do some other heavy lifting. It's exhausting and trite. It reminds me of reading that book about the pandemic with all of these prissy writers whining about how broken they feel after three weeks of isolation and spraying their groceries with bleach. On the one hand, I get it; I remember the early days of watching Cuomo's broadcast every day or every few days. On the other hand, my calm and detatched aloofness which prevents me from feeling *anything* fully enough to be able to mine it as a creative source also compels me to cringe at the astronomical levels of anxiety and early-pandemic naivety on display in those essays.

I wanted to write this in a cafe but ended up just sitting at home; the story of the pre-post-pandemic. Soon it will be over, whether or not it's actually over. So it goes.