---
title: A Timeline
layout: blogpost
author: Allie Keats
selectedurl: Blog
private: true
tags: life
description: Baring of the soul
---

cw: very unsexy sexual content, disordered eating, discussion of suicide, a whole heap of gender dysphoria

This is my best attempt at piecing things together.

2002-2007 (elementary school) - a more-or-less normal "boyhood" as far as I can remember. Friends with lots of boys and lots of girls. My best friends were almost always boys. For one friend's birthday, I got him a Harry figure and Hermione figure and he was embarassed by the latter, accusing me of getting him a doll; I couldn't see what was wrong.

2008-2010 (middle school) - realizing I was bisexual and coming out at my school. For the most part no one really cared. Puberty hit and I began to get taller without ever getting wider. For several years I remember struggling to eat, quite literally. I would eat half my dinner and feel full, often even start to feel a bit nauseous. I was terrified of throwing up and so I would stop eating. My doctor told me every year that I needed to gain weight and that my BMI was low enough to be concerning. I couldn't make myself eat more.

2011-2014 (high school) - hating how skinny my legs were, especially my knees. I don't remember a distinct moment of beginning to dislike my name, but in theater I would come up with fake names for the playbill. Hating how skinny my body overall was, wanting to gain weight, but not being able to because I usually still felt sick when eating.

2015-2018 (college) - hating my chest hair, finding it deeply unattractive; rationalized away by "that just being my taste in boys," since every boy I'd had a crush on or found attractive was a smooth skinny twink and wasn't it normal to just want to be a way that you found attractive?

July 2017 - I watch my partner, who is nonbinary, experience galling waves of the most horrifying dysmorphia. I am heartbroken seeing the way they are repulsed by and depersonalized from their body. We talk about it at length and I am deeply grateful I have never felt anything like what they describe.

October 2017 - crossdressing in women's short shorts with my partner - for fun, out of curiosity, to feel cute. I do feel cute, somehow, despite not having shaved my legs, and they find it sexy. I realize that whenever I feel sexy, it is in a feminine way (for example, I feel good being shirtless with skinny jeans on because it accents my hips).

December 2018 - laying in my partner's childhood bedroom one morning a few days after Christmas, I play with various Snapchat filters. I love how I look with most of them, not feeling horribly ugly for once. I notice that they aren't simply disguising blemishes and zits, but are explicitly feminizing the face: shrinking the nose, softening the jawline, etc.

May 2019 - once again I develop a crush on a lesbian (Julien Baker). To a friend: "I don't really feel like I'm trans but sometimes I feel like I would be more comfortable in a female body, but like... I don't feel any real desire to change anything about my gender expression or use different pronouns. Maybe I should just stop falling in love with lesbians and I'd probably stop thinking about it."

October 2019 - To the same friend: "I wish I was a lady sort of. Not really. I dunno. I just wish I was a lesbian really." [...] "It's more of a longing than feeling like something is wrong. I have this image of sitting on the couch with pink pajama pants on with long hair and a chest and hips and it feels weirdly right but also... I dunno." In my head I actively reject the idea of being anything but cis because I know I have never felt anything like the dysphoria I witnessed my partner go through.

2019-2021 - somewhere in here I begin to feel ashamed and grossed out by my body after sex. I will scramble to put at least underwear and jeans back on whereas before I would have cuddled and enjoyed pillow talk. I don't examine this feeling, chalking it up to some sort of lingering Catholic indoctrination even though it's a new development. Occasionally, but with increasing frequency, I just get my partner off and decline reciprocation because I feel gross about myself and my sex drive.

July 2020 - beaches. Envy. Seeing cute girls in swimsuits and being attracted to them, but far more than that wishing that I could be them. To that same friend: "What I really wanted was to have boobs and be wearing a hot bikini. You know. The beach. And to have no body hair. Or my shoulders, they're too broad. And to have hips. That probably is not a very cis thing to want." Also thinking something more akin to bigender: "what I really want is to just be able to snap my fingers and just be able to go back and forth."

August 2020 - discussing gender euphoria with that friend yet again. "The main, recurring image that comes to mind is like sitting on the couch some morning with a mug of coffee wearing just a really long white t shirt with a female body."

November 2020 - no-shave November arrives and I grow the fullest beard I've ever been able to grow. I flit back and forth between feeling vaguely attractive with it and hating it. My partner repeatedly tells me not to shave it because they like how it looks and feels. I end up keeping it until June 2021.

December 2020 - a thread comes up on my Twitter feed about trans eggs always picking "opposite" gender characters in video games. I've been doing this since at least 2016 (with Fallout 4) and probably before that.

Summer 2021 - sitting in the Whistling Kettle in Troy, a girl walks in wearing a sundress. I feel a physical ache in my chest at the strength of the envy over how pretty she is and how desperately I wish **I** could be a girl like her. I spend some workdays just making pretty girls on picrew. If I'm bold I give them trans pins. I make one my profile picture on a Discord server for a streamer I watch, and I ask to use they/them pronouns in that community.

December 2021 - first time I remember feeling "mirror horror" - brushing my teeth in the dark because something was unidentifiably **wrong** about the version of me looking back. Sometimes it felt totally abstract and without cause, and sometimes it was identifiably because I wanted to see a girl looking back and couldn't. In the women's section of a clothing store, I see various sweaters and cardigans that make my heart ache out of longing. I write shitty poems and try to write a song but I can't find the words. I think about telling my partner but I can't figure out how.

May 2022 - a life-changing breakup after 5 years together. On the last or second-to-last night before moving out, one of the final times (as of writing) that we saw each other, I choke out a "I don't think I'm cis, and it was killing me that I never told you." Afterwards I write in my journal that I don't understand exactly why I did this, that certainly with everything going on it was not the ideal time, but that I feel like a weight has been lifted off of me.

July 2022 - sat down and cried in the shower about not being a girl. Drunk at a bar one night a week later, heart-pounding, I asked 3 friends there to start using they/them for me, the first time I've ever asked this of anyone IRL. They were all accepting and wonderful. One of them immediately asked if I wanted to change my name and I froze in fear; I think a part of me absolutely knew the answer was yes, that I had never liked my name, but it felt too real, too much, and besides I hadn't even thought about names yet. My plan was to just tell this group about changing my pronouns, but it felt so good that within 72 hours I had asked nearly everyone I talked to regularly to make this change.

Aug 2022 - a lifelong friend is concerned about me and my tendencies towards depression and suicidal ideation after my breakup. I assure her that I have no intention of harming myself. The ideas are all abstract and besides my Schopenhauerian will-to-live is much too strong for me to ever act on them. While explaining this, the voice in my mind says: "Besides, if I were going to kill myself, it would be because I wasn't born a girl, not because of some breakup." I don't tell her this, but my brain catches, halts, scratches like a record when the thought forms. I realize that there is a great deal of truth to it.

November 2022 - for the first time I feel dysphoria about my Adam's apple when looking at my profile in the mirror. I go home for Thanksgiving and while there I ask one of my oldest friends, who is a trans man, how he *knew*, how he was certain. He tells me it's hard to say for sure, but there was simply a point where it dawned on him that if he didn't transition he was going to die. He looks at me and says "Why do you ask?" I pause and search and reply, "Why do you think?"

December 2022 - the name Allie comes to me while I am writing a song and I can't let it go or get it out of my head. Something about it just feels right. I spend a week or two straight unable to think about anything besides my gender. It feels like my brain is on fire, and I explicitly comment as such to a few friends and to my therapist. I actively try to think about other things but my mind keeps wandering back to it. I get sick and joke that "I thought about gender so hard I gave myself a sinus infection." I buy foundation and concealer to cover up my acne and five-o'-clock shadow. At Christmas my mom calls me "he" and says something to my sister about "your brother" and a voice in my head wants to cry out that this is wrong, but I can't bring myself to say anything. I reach out to every trans woman I know, and several I don't, asking how they knew. Most tell me that they just *did*, and all of them that I talk to tell me they knew in middle school or earlier, even the ones who didn't begin to transition until much, much later in life. At the very least they knew something was wrong, even if they didn't have the words and the language for it yet. I am afraid that I'm just making it up because I didn't. I write "No Trace." I email two HRT clinics and am told that I will be put on a wait list.

January 2023 - On an impulse, I get my ears pierced because I believe it will help me look more feminine. I ask one friend online to start calling me Allie, and it feels good. I ask a few more, then a Discord server, and then I start to ask a few friends that I actually see in-person (although I never ask in-person, always through text). I book a laser hair removal session for my chest and go to my first appointment. It hurts but once the hives clear I am happy and relieved to see how smooth my chest is and I begin to think about getting it done on my legs and maybe my face too. I worry that I am rushing things and that I may do something I regret even though the fleeting moments of actually feeling feminine are some of the happiest and most freeing I can remember. I try to focus on the fact that every step I've taken so far has just made me want to take more.

February 2023 - an HRT clinic emails me back and I book an appointment for March. I am full of fear, feeling more strongly than I have in months that maybe I could keep living as a boy and be fine with it and that I am not ready for what I could be committing to. While getting ready to go out with a friend, I put on a headband and mascara and watch as, in the mirror, before my eyes, my perception changes from seeing someone pretty to seeing my own, ugly, male face behind gaudy makeup and I have to look away out of disgust. A voice inside of me says to stop trying now before you make anything worse than it already is, just go back to how you were surviving before. At home I wear a skirt, button-up, and cami and cry because for a second I looked in the mirror and saw a girl. I begin writing this timeline.